Post: Switch to bam (#30)
ubinfie/ubinfie.github.io: _posts/2024-05-14-switch-to-bam.md

Or also, they might need to have multilocus sequence typing (MLST)
run so that all alleles are known in future comparisons.
Some labs are sketching genomes as they are sequenced
and so certain tools can create those sketches.
Finally, there might be individual genotyping operations
such as Salmonella serotyping or virulence factors detection.

### assembly

For genome assembly, many labs are using Shovill.
However, Shovill does not natively read bam files.
Therefore, this workflow breaks slightly unless there is some conversion step.

Other assemblers that people commonly use for bacterial genomes are SPAdes and SKESA.
SPAdes does read bam natively and so that is good.
However, it does not appear that SKESA can read bam natively.

### MLST

MLST software usually takes fasta or fastq files.
At this point there are a million classic MLST software packages and for some additional information,
please check out Page et al 2017 {% cite Page2017 %}.
For whole genome MLST software tools, I could also not find any packages that natively read bam.
Please see [my previous blog post](https://lskatz.github.io/posts/2023/04/09/wgMLST.html) for an in depth view into three of them.

> I could not find any MLST software that reads bam natively.

Reviewer: This is said already on line 109

Author: Fixed in 220de13..175dc61

---
layout: post
title: What does it take to switch over to bam from fastq?
tags:
  - bam
  - fastq 
contributors:
  - lskatz
  - SeanSierra-Patev
reviewers:
  - pmenzel
---

> It has been over 14 years since the formalization of the fastq format {% cite Cock2009 %}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It has been over 14 years since the formalization of the fastq format ({% cite Cock2009 %}).
```

Author: I'll update this manually to help avoid a git collision

> It has been over 14 years since the formalization of the fastq format {% cite Cock2009 %}.
> It describes sequences and their quality scores.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It has been over 14 years since the formalization of the fastq format {% cite Cock2009 %},
which describes sequences and their quality scores.
```

not sure L15 needs to be its own sentence

For paired end reads, sequences are encoded in separate files, usually called R1 and R2 [^1].
Unfortunately despite the publication,
fastq format is not entirely standardized!
For example, it is possible to have a valid fastq format in either 4-line-per-entry format,

> or splitting sequences into multiple lines.

Reviewer 2: horrifying to learn

Author: yuuuuup

Additionally, the defline itself is not entirely standardized and is basically free text.
However, we have had a lot of innovations in sequence formats since then.
One of those innovations is the BAM format which is the binary alignment/mapping format.
R1 and R2 are encoded in the same file.

Fastq files are integral to genomic epidemiology.
State health labs sequence genomes,
transfer the fastq files to an internal repository,
run quality checks (QC), usually through a quality assurance (QA) pipeline.

**So what would it take to change this whole process to bam files instead?**
Bam files have many advantages including having one file per sample,
encoding extra information such as alignment data,
and being indexed for random access.
For our purposes here, bam files will be unaligned bam (uBAM)

> because they are not aligned against anything.

Reviewer 2: I think this will be potentially missed by readers but it's what makes everything else work below, perhaps it should be called out a bit more? I'm not sure how best to do that though.

Author: ok I'll notate it all as `uBAM`. Good point.

## Sequencing

First, the sequencers would have to output bam files.
Can they?
The Illumina platforms and the Ion Torrent platforms do automatically.
After calling with at least Dorado, ONT sequencing outputs bam files.
[Need help here: PacBio? ]
For platforms that do not have this automation,
we would need an easy conversion.

One such easy conversion is with `samtools`, e.g.,

```shell
samtools import -1 R1.fastq.gz -2 R2.fastq.gz --order ro -O bam,level=0 | \
  samtools sort -M - -o sorted.bam
```

## Repository

Usually the fastq files end up in some kind of repository, organized by
run or by organism.
Instead of fastq files, it is easy to imagine that now the 
repository consists of the bam files alone.
One might be concerned about taking additional space,
but actually unsorted bam may offer a storage space savings over individual fastq files,
besides reduction in complexity gained by combining forward and reverse reads.
The above command uses `-M` in `samtools sort`, which sorts by minimizers, thereby saving tons of space.
In my own anecdote, I transformed a 63M R1 and 55M R2 file into an 81M unmapped sorted bam file.

> This represents huge file storage savings.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A 31% storage reduction, in this case, can represents huge file storage savings across an entire sequencing data repository.
```

To my knowledge, none of them!
This is one area where we need to see more adaptation of bam files.

## Primary analysis

There are several primary analyses that can be performed
right after QA/QC.
For example, reads might need to be transformed into an assembly.
Or also, they might need to have multilocus sequence typing (MLST)
run so that all alleles are known in future comparisons.
Some labs are sketching genomes as they are sequenced
and so certain tools can create those sketches.
Finally, there might be individual genotyping operations
such as Salmonella serotyping or virulence factors detection.

### assembly

For genome assembly, many labs are using Shovill.
However, Shovill does not natively read bam files.
Therefore, this workflow breaks slightly unless there is some conversion step.

Other assemblers that people commonly use for bacterial genomes are SPAdes and SKESA.
SPAdes does read bam natively and so that is good.
However, it does not appear that SKESA can read bam natively.

### MLST

MLST software usually takes fasta or fastq files.
At this point there are a million classic MLST software packages and for some additional information,

> please check out Page et al 2017 {% cite Page2017 %}.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
please check out {% cite Page2017 %}.
```

it should render as `*Page et al. 2017*`, no need to type it out

---
layout: post
title: What does it take to switch over to bam from fastq?
tags:
  - bam
  - fastq 
contributors:
  - lskatz
  - SeanSierra-Patev
reviewers:
  - pmenzel
  - hexylena 
---

It has been over 14 years since the formalization of the fastq format ({% cite Cock2009 %}),
which describes sequences and their quality scores.
For paired end reads, sequences are encoded in separate files, usually called R1 and R2 [^1].
Unfortunately despite the publication,
fastq format is not entirely standardized!
For example, it is possible to have a valid fastq format in either 4-line-per-entry format,
or splitting sequences into multiple lines.
Additionally, the defline itself is not entirely standardized and is basically free text.
However, we have had a lot of innovations in sequence formats since then.

> One of those innovations is the BAM format which is the binary alignment/mapping format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of those innovations is the [SAM/BAM format](https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/), the (binary) alignment/mapping format. While this file format is typically used to store information about alignments of sequencing reads, it can also just stored the unaligned sequencing data.
```

> R1 and R2 are encoded in the same file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most importantly, both reads from paired-end sequencing (i.e. R1 and R2) are stored in the same single file.
```

Author: Addressed in 5ddd346..82befe8

> Fastq files are integral to genomic epidemiology.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Fastq files, as a means for storing primary sequencing data before any downstream analysis,  are integral to genomic epidemiology.
```

State health labs sequence genomes,
transfer the fastq files to an internal repository,
run quality checks (QC), usually through a quality assurance (QA) pipeline.

> **So what would it take to change this whole process to bam files instead?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**So what would it take to change this whole process to bam files instead?**  
```

> Bam files have many advantages including having one file per sample,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
BAM files have many advantages, most importanly having only one file per sample instead of two,
```

Author: addressed in 5ddd346..82befe8

encoding extra information such as alignment data,
and being indexed for random access.
For our purposes here, bam files will be unaligned bam (uBAM)
because they are not aligned against anything.

## Sequencing

First, the sequencers would have to output uBAM files.
Can they?

> The Illumina platforms and the Ion Torrent platforms do automatically.

Reviewer: I didn't see Illumina being able to output BAM just for the sequencing data.

Author: Thanks. I'll keep looking just in case. I don't want to get that fact wrong in particular.

Author: I had added in Illumina text per the representative

Looking at each of these software packages, we could not find any documentation that uBAM is natively read.
However, we could find that FASTA and FASTQ were valid inputs.
There are other software packages in the world for specific pathogens like _Salmonella_
but for this generalized blog post, we did not investigate further.

## Other compression methods

This article discusses the uBAM format, but there have been many attempts over the years to make other compression formats [^2].
The [cram format](https://samtools.github.io/hts-specs/CRAMv3.pdf) is probably the best example.
Cram has an even better lossless compression of sequences than uBAM,
and we even confirmed it on our own sequence.

```bash
samtools import -1 1.fastq.gz -2 2.fastq.gz --order ro -O bam,level=0 | \
  samtools sort -O cram --output-fmt-option archive -M - -o archive.cram
```

When viewing the same sequences in FASTQ, BAM, or CRAM, we get an astonishing reduction.

```text
-rw-------. 1 user users 81M May 30 20:03 unmapped.bam
-rw-------. 1 user users 55M May 31 09:18 unmapped.cram
-rw-------. 1 user users 55M Dec  6  2019 1.fastq.gz
-rw-------. 1 user users 63M Dec  6  2019 2.fastq.gz
```

> Cram is seemlessly incorporated into samtools and so you can freely convert between formats.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CRAM format is seemlessly incorporated into samtools, allowing for freely converting between formats.
```

> In fact, [EBI stores a ton of cram files already](https://x.com/BonfieldJames/status/1182180199657607168).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In fact, [EBI stores a ton of CRAM files already](https://x.com/BonfieldJames/status/1182180199657607168).
```

> So why wouldn't we recommend cram up front?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So why wouldn't we recommend CRAM upfront?
```
